Abstract
Automating 3D reconstruction of indoor environments is invaluable for scene understanding, which is essential for effective building information modeling (BIM). This automation supports BIM in reducing project costs, facilitating building planning, and improving management efficiency during renovations. However, current scan-to-BIM methods often prioritize geometric modeling over material attribute information, which is crucial for accurate facility assessments, cost estimation, energy analysis, asset management, and sustainable design. Existing material recognition methods suffer from low accuracy, limited material coverage, an emphasis on 2D image detection over 3D reconstruction, and a lack of automatic BIM integration. To address these challenges, this study presents an innovative scan-to-BIM framework that leverages deep learning to automatically integrate geometric and material attributes from point clouds for indoor elements. An enhanced instance segmentation network is introduced for reliable object identification, besides an accurate workflow for reconstructing 3D BIM models, capturing geometry, position, quantity, shape, orientation, and material details. The framework also includes a novel material classification model based on point cloud features along with an integrated algorithm in the Revit platform to automate the 3D modeling. The experimental results demonstrate that our framework significantly improves instance segmentation accuracy over the baseline model. Reconstructed 3D BIM models of space-forming elements achieved above 98% correctness and completeness across tested datasets, while space-occupying models captured realistic scene properties with object type and orientation accuracy of 98% and 91%, respectively. Furthermore, the material recognition model demonstrated high performance, with a point-based weighted average F1-score of 0.973 and an object-based weighted average accuracy of 94.70%. The framework accurately models various point cloud scales, layouts, furniture, and material types across diverse environments.
